[DataGrid] New Toolbar component (#14611)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/components/columns-panel/columns-panel.md

# Data Grid - Columns Panel component 🚧

<p class="description">Customize the columns panel UI.</p>

:::warning
This component is incomplete.

Currently, the only feature available for the Columns Panel component is the Trigger. In the future, this component will allow you to extend the data grid's columns panel.

In the meantime, see the following:

- [Custom subcomponents—Columns panel](/x/react-data-grid/components/#columns-panel)

>   :::

Author: Keen to hear what others think about this note. I can foresee this composition pattern being helpful for the columns panel and filter panel when those eventually get a refresh. This note is in preparation for that.

---
title: React Data Grid - Columns Panel component
productId: x-data-grid
components: ColumnsPanelTrigger
packageName: '@mui/x-data-grid'
githubLabel: 'component: data grid'
---

# Data Grid - Columns Panel 🚧

<p class="description">Customize the Data Grid's columns panel.</p>

:::warning
This component is incomplete.

Currently, the `ColumnsPanelTrigger` is the only part of the Columns Panel component available.
Future versions of the Columns Panel component will make it possible to compose each of its parts to create a custom columns panel.

In the meantime, it's still possible to deeply customize the panel's subcomponents using custom slots.
See [Custom subcomponents—Columns panel](/x/react-data-grid/components/#columns-panel) for more details.

:::

## Basic usage

The demo below shows how to add a columns panel trigger to a custom toolbar.

{{"demo": "GridColumnsPanelTrigger.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Anatomy

```tsx
import { ColumnsPanelTrigger } from '@mui/x-data-grid';

<ColumnsPanelTrigger />;
```

> ### ColumnsPanelTrigger

Reviewer: I prefer to style headers like these as plain text—they can get a little unwieldy when the names are extra long.

```suggestion
### Columns Panel Trigger
```

`ColumnsPanelTrigger` is a button that opens/closes the columns panel.
It renders the `baseButton` slot.

## Custom elements

Use the `render` prop to replace default elements.
See [Components usage—Customization](/x/react-data-grid/components/usage/#customization) for more details, and [Toolbar—Custom elements demo](/x/react-data-grid/components/toolbar/#custom-elements) for an example of a custom Columns Panel Trigger.

## Accessibility

### ARIA

> You must apply a text label or an `aria-label` attribute to the `<ColumnsPanelTrigger />`.

Reviewer: This is a solid use of the `<ComponentCase />` style IMO, because it makes it clear exactly where the aria label needs to go. That said, I think it would still be understood as plain text. It's your call.

```suggestion
You must apply a text label or an `aria-label` attribute to the Columns Panel Trigger.
```

---
title: React Data Grid - Columns Panel component
productId: x-data-grid
components: ColumnsPanelTrigger
packageName: '@mui/x-data-grid'
githubLabel: 'component: data grid'
---

# Data Grid - Columns Panel 🚧

<p class="description">Customize the Data Grid's columns panel.</p>

:::warning
This component is incomplete.

> Currently, the only part available for the Columns Panel component is the Trigger. In future, this component will allow you to extend the Data Grid's columns panel.

Author: Good point, this would be slightly more specific:

```suggestion
Currently, the Trigger is the only composable part of the Columns Panel available.
Future versions of the Columns Panel component will make it possible to compose each of its parts to create a custom columns panel.
```

In the meantime, see the following:

- [Custom subcomponents—Columns panel](/x/react-data-grid/components/#columns-panel)

:::

## Basic usage

The demo below shows how to add a columns panel trigger to a custom toolbar.

{{"demo": "GridColumnsPanelTrigger.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Anatomy

```tsx
import { ColumnsPanel } from '@mui/x-data-grid';

<ColumnsPanel.Trigger />;
```

> ### Trigger

Author: I'm not so sure 🤔 

The snippet provides an example composition using the component parts, and these headings describe each part of the component anatomy.

A button that opens the columns panel.

Renders the `baseButton` slot.

## Custom elements

The default elements can be replaced using the `render` prop. See [Grid components—Customization](/x/react-data-grid/components/overview/#customization).

> See the [Toolbar—Custom elements demo](/x/react-data-grid/components/toolbar/#custom-elements) for an example.

Author: > The fact that we need to link to two different docs here makes me think that this section ought to be fleshed out more to avoid this

Right, there will be a lot more to show here once the Column Panel component has been built. Right now, it feels a bit much to include a demo of customizing just the trigger, but that's open to debate.
